

Installing MySQL

What is MySQL workbench?

MySQL Workbench is a visual tool for database architects, developers, and DBAs. It provides data modeling, SQL development, and comprehensive administration tools for server configuration, user administration, backup, and much more.

What is a Database Management System (DBMS)?

A Database Management System (DBMS) is software that interacts with end users, applications, and the database itself to capture and analyze data. It allows for the creation, retrieval, updating, and management of data in databases. If you know
one DBMS, you can easily transition to another, as they share similar concepts and functionalities.

Windows / macOS Installation

1. Download from: https://dev.mysql.com/downloads/installer/
2. Run the installer and choose Developer Default.
3. Set a root password when prompted.
4. Install MySQL Workbench (optional but helpful GUI).

Linux (Ubuntu) Installation

Follow these steps to install MySQL and create a user:


Step 1: Update Package Index



Step 2: Install MySQL Server



Step 3: Secure the Installation

Choose your options (yes to most).


Step 4: Create a User
Log into MySQL:

Run the following SQL commands:



Step 5: Test Login

Enter the password:


Make sure to replace
production environments.

with a secure password of your choice in

Getting Started with MySQL

What is a Database?

A database is a container that stores related data in an organized way. In MySQL, a database holds one or more tables.
Think of it like:
• Folder analogy:
• A database is like a folder.
• Each table is a file inside that folder.
• The rows in the table are like the content inside each file.
• Excel analogy:
• A database is like an Excel workbook.
• Each table is a separate sheet inside that workbook.
• Each row in the table is like a row in Excel.


Step 1: Create a Database


After creating the database, either:
• Right-click it in MySQL Workbench and select “Set as Default Schema”, or
• Use this SQL command:




Step 2: Create a Table

Now we’ll create a simple	table:

This table will store basic user info.


Step 3: Drop the Database

You can delete the entire database (and all its tables) using:

Be careful — this will delete everything in that database.


Data Types Explained


• 
• 
• 

• 

: Integer type, used for whole numbers.
: Variable-length string, up to 100 characters.
: A string object with a value chosen from a list of permitted values. eg.

: Stores date values. eg

• 	: Stores date and time, automatically set to the current timestamp when a row is created.

• 

• 

: Stores TRUE or FALSE values, often used for flags like	.

               : Stores exact numeric data values, useful for financial data. The first number is the total number of digits, and the second is the number of digits after the decimal point.




Constraints Explained


• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

: Automatically generates a unique number for each row.
: Uniquely identifies each row in the table.
: Ensures a column cannot have a NULL value.
: Ensures all values in a column are different.
: Sets a default value for a column if no value is provided. eg.
,





Working with Tables in MySQL

Selecting Data from a Table

Select All Columns

This fetches every column and every row from the	table.

Select Specific Columns



This only fetches the

and

columns from all rows.





Renaming a Table

To rename an existing table:

To rename it back:



Altering a Table

You can use	to modify an existing table.

Add a Column


Drop a Column


Modify a Column Type



Move a Column to the First Position

To move a column (e.g.,	) to the first position:

To move a column after another column (e.g., move	after	):


Inserting Data into MySQL Tables

To add data into a table, we use the	statement.


Insert Without Specifying Column Names (Full Row Insert)

This method requires you to provide values for all columns in order, except
columns with default values or	.

Not recommended if your table structure might change (e.g., new columns added later).


Insert by Specifying Column Names (Best Practice)

This method is safer and more readable. You only insert into specific columns.

or for multiple rows:


The remaining columns like

(which is

) and

(which has a default) are automatically handled by MySQL.


Insert Multiple Rows at Once


This is more efficient than inserting rows one by one.


Querying Data in MySQL using

The	statement is used to query data from a table.


Basic Syntax


To select all columns:



Filtering Rows with


Equal To


Not Equal To


Greater Than / Less Than


Greater Than or Equal / Less Than or Equal



Working with NULL

IS NULL


IS NOT NULL



BETWEEN




IN




LIKE (Pattern Matching)




AND / OR




ORDER BY




LIMIT





Quick Quiz

What does the following queries do?




UPDATE - Modifying Existing Data

The	statement is used to change values in one or more rows.

Basic Syntax



Example: Update One Column


This changes the name of the user with	to “Alicia”.

Example: Update Multiple Columns



Without WHERE Clause (Warning)



This updates every row in the table. Be very careful when omitting the clause.


Quick Quiz: Practice Your	Skills

Try answering or running these queries based on your	table.

1. Update the salary of user with	to ?70,000.



2. Change the name of the user with email
to	.



3. Increase salary by ?10,000 for all users whose salary is less than ?60,000.



4. Set the gender of user	to	.



5. Reset salary of all users to ?50,000 (Careful - affects all rows).

Note: This query will overwrite salary for every user. Use with caution!

DELETE - Removing Data from a Table

The	statement removes rows from a table.

Basic Syntax



Example: Delete One Row



Delete Multiple Rows



Delete All Rows (but keep table structure)



Drop the Entire Table (use with caution)



This removes the table structure and all data permanently.


Best Practices

• Always use	unless you’re intentionally updating/deleting everything.

• Consider running a will be affected:

with the same

clause first to confirm what



• Always back up important data before performing destructive operations.

Quick Quiz: Practice Your	Skills

what will happen if you run these queries?



MySQL Constraints

Constraints in MySQL are rules applied to table columns to ensure the accuracy, validity, and integrity of the data.


1. Constraint

Ensures that all values in a column are different.

Example (during table creation):


Add	using	:



2. Constraint

Ensures that a column cannot contain NULL values.

Example:


Change an existing column to NOT NULL:


Make a column nullable again:



3. Constraint

Ensures that values in a column satisfy a specific condition.

Example: Allow only dates of birth after Jan 1, 2000

Naming the constraint (	) helps if you want to drop it later.


4. Constraint

Sets a default value for a column if none is provided during insert.

Example:


Add DEFAULT using	:



5. Constraint

Uniquely identifies each row. Must be NOT NULL and UNIQUE.

Example:


Add later with	:



6. 

Used with	to automatically assign the next number.

Example:

Each new row gets the next available integer value in	.


Summary Table


ConstraintPurposeUNIQUEPrevents duplicate valuesNOT NULLEnsures value is not NULLCHECKRestricts values using a conditionDEFAULTSets a default valuePRIMARY KEYUniquely identifies each rowAUTO_INCREMENTAutomatically generates unique numbers
SQL Functions (MySQL)

SQL functions help you analyze, transform, or summarize data in your tables.
We’ll use the	table which includes:


•

,

,

,

,

,	,





1. Aggregate Functions

These return a single value from a set of rows.

Count total number of users:

Count users who are Female:



and
Get the minimum and maximum salary:




Calculate total salary payout:



Find average salary:



Grouping with
Average salary by gender:



2. String Functions


Length of user names:



and
Convert names to lowercase or uppercase:



Combine name and email:



3. Date Functions


Current date and time:



,	,
Extract parts of	:




Find number of days between today and birthdate:



Calculate age in years:



4. Mathematical Functions


,	,



Find even or odd user IDs:



5. Conditional Functions





Summary Table


FunctionPurposeCOUNT()Count rowsSUM()Total of a columnAVG()Average of valuesMIN() / MAX()Lowest / highest valueLENGTH()String lengthCONCAT()Merge stringsYEAR() / DATEDIFF()Date breakdown / ageROUND()Rounding numbersIF()Conditional logic
MySQL Transactions and AutoCommit

By default, MySQL operates in AutoCommit mode. This means that every SQL
statement is treated as a transaction and is committed automatically. However, for more control over when changes are saved, you can turn AutoCommit off and
manage transactions manually.


1. Disabling AutoCommit

When AutoCommit is off, you can explicitly control when to commit or rollback changes.

To disable AutoCommit:

This turns off AutoCommit, meaning that changes you make won’t be saved to the database unless you explicitly tell MySQL to commit them.
Important: Until you execute a	, your changes are not permanent.


2. COMMIT — Save Changes to the Database

Once you’ve made changes and you’re confident that everything is correct, you can
use the	command to save those changes.

To commit a transaction:


This saves all the changes made since the last point, the changes become permanent.

or

. After this




3. ROLLBACK — Revert Changes to the Last Safe Point

If you make an error or decide you don’t want to save your changes, you can
rollback the transaction to its previous state.

To rollback a transaction:

This undoes all changes since the last	or	.



Example Workflow
Here’s a simple example of using



and



in a transaction:


1. Turn off AutoCommit:

2. Make some changes (e.g., updating a salary):

3. Decide whether to commit or rollback:
1. If you’re happy with the changes, run:

2. If you’re not happy and want to revert the changes, run:




4. Enabling AutoCommit Again

If you want to turn AutoCommit back on (so that every statement is automatically committed), you can do so with:



Best Practices



• Use
• Use

when you want to make changes permanent.
to discard changes if something goes wrong.

• Consider disabling AutoCommit when performing complex updates to avoid saving partial or incorrect data.

Understanding	in MySQL

A	is a constraint in SQL that uniquely identifies each row in a table.
It is one of the most important concepts in database design.


What is a Primary Key?

• A	:

• Must be unique
• Cannot be NULL
• Is used to identify rows in a table
• Can be a single column or a combination of columns
• Each table can have only one primary key

Example:



How Is	Different from	?



At first glance,

and

might seem similar since both prevent

duplicate values. But there are important differences:


FeaturePRIMARY KEYUNIQUEMust be uniqueYesYesAllows NULL valuesNoYes (one or more NULLs allowed)How many allowedOnly one per tableCan have multipleRequired by tableRecommended, often requiredOptionalDroppingCannot be easily droppedCan be dropped anytime

Example with UNIQUE


In this example:


• 
• 

is the unique identifier for each row.
must be unique, but is not the primary key.





Can I Drop a PRIMARY KEY?

Yes, but it is more restricted than dropping a	constraint.


This may fail if the primary key is being used elsewhere (like in a foreign key or auto_increment column).
To drop a	constraint:


Auto Increment



In MySQL, a

is often used with the

attribute to

automatically generate unique values for new rows.

This means that every time you insert a new row, MySQL will automatically assign a

unique value to the
using:






Key Takeaways

column. You can change the starting value of





• Use
• Use
or phone).

for the main identifier of a row.
for enforcing non-duplicate values in other columns (like email

• You can have only one primary key, but you can have many unique constraints.

Foreign Keys in MySQL

A foreign key is a column that creates a link between two tables. It ensures that the value in one table must match a value in another table.
This is used to maintain data integrity between related data.


Why Use Foreign Keys?

Imagine this scenario:
You have a	table. Now you want to store each user’s address. Instead of

putting address columns inside the
table, and link it to
    
table, you create a separate using a foreign key.




Creating a Table with a Foreign Key

Let’s create an	table where each address belongs to a user.


Explanation:
• is a foreign key.

• It references the

column in the

table.

• This ensures that every address must be linked to a valid user.


Dropping a Foreign Key

To drop a foreign key, you need to know its constraint name. MySQL auto- generates it if you don’t specify one, or you can name it yourself:

To drop it:



Adding a Foreign Key Later (Using ALTER)

Suppose the foreign key was not defined during table creation. You can add it
later using	:



Adding	Action

By default, if you delete a user that has related addresses, MySQL will throw an
error. You can control this behavior with	.

Example with	:
If you want addresses to be automatically deleted when the user is deleted:

Or alter it later:



Other ON DELETE Options


ON DELETE
OptionBehaviorCASCADEDeletes all related rows in child tableSET NULLSets the foreign key to NULL in the child tableRESTRICTPrevents deletion of parent if child exists (default)


Summary

• Foreign keys connect tables and enforce valid references.
• You can create them inline or with	.
• You can drop them by name.
• Use	to control what happens when the parent row is deleted.

SQL JOINs in MySQL

In SQL, JOINs are used to combine rows from two or more tables based on related columns — usually a foreign key in one table referencing a primary key in another.
We’ll use the following two tables:

table

idname1Aarav2Sneha3Raj
table

iduser_idcity11Mumbai22Kolkata34DelhiNote:	is a foreign key that references	.


1. INNER JOIN

Returns only the matching rows from both tables.



Output:

namecityAaravMumbaiSnehaKolkatais excluded because there is no matching address.	is excluded
because its	(4) is not in	.

Visual Representation:



2. LEFT JOIN

Returns all rows from the left table (	), and matching rows from the right
table (	). If no match is found, NULLs are returned.


Output:

namecityAaravMumbaiSnehaKolkataRajNULLis shown even though he doesn’t have an address.

Visual Representation:



3. RIGHT JOIN

Returns all rows from the right table (	), and matching rows from the
left table (	). If no match is found, NULLs are returned.


Output:

namecityAaravMumbaiSnehaKolkata

namecityNULLDelhiis shown even though it points to a	that doesn’t exist.

Visual Representation:



Summary Table


JOIN TypeDescriptionINNER JOINOnly matching rows from both tablesLEFT JOINAll rows from left table + matching from rightRIGHT JOINAll rows from right table + matching from left
SQL	and



The
   
operator in SQL is used to combine the result sets of two or more statements. It removes duplicates by default.

If you want to include all rows including duplicates, use	.


Example Scenario

You already have a	table for active users. Now, we’ll create an
table to store users who are administrators or have special roles. We
will then combine the names from both tables using	.


Step 1: Create the	Table




Step 2: Insert Sample Data into




Step 3: Use	to Combine Data

Let’s combine the active and admin user names.

This returns a single list of unique names from both tables.


Example
If you want to keep duplicate names (if any), use	.



Using More Than One Column



You can also select multiple columns as long as both
same number of columns with compatible types.

queries return the




Adding separate roles




Using Order By with




Rules of

1. The number of columns and their data types must match in all statements.
2. removes duplicates by default.
3. keeps duplicates.


When to Use

• When you have two similar tables (like current and archived data).
• When you need to combine filtered results (e.g., high-salary users from two sources).
• When performing cross-category reporting.


Summary


OperatorBehaviorUNIONCombines results, removes duplicatesUNION ALLCombines results, keeps duplicates
Self JOIN in MySQL

A Self JOIN is a regular join, but the table is joined with itself.
This is useful when rows in the same table are related to each other. For example, when users refer other users, and we store the ID of the person who referred them
in the same	table.


Step 1: Add a	Column

We’ll extend the existing	table to include a column called	,
which holds the	of the user who referred them.

This column:
• Will be NULL for users who were not referred.
• Will contain the	of another user who referred them.


Step 2: Insert Referral Data (Optional)

Assuming	is the first user, and referred others:



Step 3: Use a Self JOIN to Get Referrer Names

We want to get each user’s name along with the name of the person who referred them.


Explanation:


• refers to the user being queried.
• refers to the user who referred them.
• 	is used so that users with included.




in




are also




Sample Output:

iduser_namereferred_by1AaravNULL2SnehaAarav3RajAarav4FatimaSneha

Summary

• Use Self JOIN when you need to join a table with itself.
• In referral-based relationships, store the referrer’s	in the same table.

• Use aliases like

and

to differentiate the two instances of the same table.

MySQL Views

A view in MySQL is a virtual table based on the result of a	query. It does
not store data itself — it always reflects the current data in the base tables. Views are useful when:
• You want to simplify complex queries
• You want to reuse logic
• You want to hide certain columns from users
• You want a “live snapshot” of filtered data


Creating a View

Suppose we want a view that lists all users earning more than ?70,000.



Querying the View


This will return all users from the	table where salary is above ?70,000.


Demonstrating That a View is Always Up-To-Date

Let’s see what happens when the underlying data changes.

Step 1: View before update

Output:

idnamesalary2Sneha750005Fatima80000
Step 2: Update a user’s salary


Step 3: Query the view again

New Output:

idnamesalary2Sneha750005Fatima800003Raj72000Notice how Raj is now included in the view — without updating the view
itself. That’s because views always reflect live data from the original table.



Dropping a View

To remove a view:



Summary

• Views act like saved SELECT queries
• Views are not duplicated data
• Changes to base tables are reflected automatically
• Great for simplifying complex queries or creating filtered access

MySQL Indexes

Indexes in MySQL are used to speed up data retrieval. They work like the index of a book — helping the database engine find rows faster, especially for searches, filters, and joins.


Viewing Indexes on a Table

To see the indexes on a table, use:



This shows all the indexes currently defined on the automatically created primary key index.



Creating a Single-Column Index
Suppose you’re frequently searching users by their

table, including the







. You can speed this up

by indexing the	column.


What this does:
• Creates an index named
• Improves performance of queries like:




Important Notes

• Indexes consume extra disk space

• Indexes slow down

,

, and

operations slightly

(because the index must be updated)
• Use indexes only when needed (i.e., for columns used in
)



Creating a Multi-Column Index


,	,





If you often query users using both
more efficient than separate indexes.




Usage Example:

and

, a multi-column index is



This query can take advantage of the combined index on	and	.


Index Order Matters

For a multi-column index on	:

• This works efficiently:


• But this may not use the index effectively:

Because the first column in the index (	) is missing in the filter.


Dropping an Index

To delete an index:



Summary


FeatureDescriptionSHOW INDEXESView current indexes on a tableCREATE INDEXCreate single or multi-column indexesDROP INDEXRemove an indexUse whenQuery performance on large tables is a concernAvoid onColumns that are rarely queried or always unique
Subqueries in MySQL

A subquery is a query nested inside another query. Subqueries are useful for breaking down complex problems into smaller parts.
They can be used in:


• 
• 
• 
  
statements clauses clauses




Example Scenario: Salary Comparison

Suppose we want to find all users who earn more than the average salary of all users.


Scalar Subquery Example

This subquery returns a single value — the average salary — and we compare each user’s salary against it.



Explanation:
• The inner query:



returns the average salary.

• The outer query selects all users with a salary greater than that average.


Subquery with

Now let’s say we want to find users who have been referred by someone who earns more than ?75,000.



Explanation:
• The inner query:
of user IDs (referrers) who earn more than ?75,000.
• The outer query selects users whose



         returns a list is in that list.



Other Places Subqueries Are Used

You can also use subqueries:


• Inside
• In the
  
columns (called scalar subqueries) clause to create derived tables

Example in	:

This shows each user’s salary along with the overall average.



Summary


Subquery TypeUse CaseScalar SubqueryReturns one value (e.g. AVG, MAX)Subquery with INReturns multiple valuesSubquery in SELECTShows related calculated valueSubquery in FROMActs as a virtual tableSubqueries are powerful tools when filtering based on computed or dynamic conditions.

GROUP BY and HAVING in MySQL

The	clause is used to group rows that have the same values in
specified columns. It is typically used with aggregate functions like	,	,
,	, or	.


The
     
clause is used to filter groups after aggregation — similar to how filters individual rows.




Example Table:

Assume this is your	table:

idnamegendersalaryreferred_by_id1AaravMale80000NULL2SnehaFemale7500013RajMale7200014FatimaFemale8500025PriyaFemale70000NULL

GROUP BY Example: Average Salary by Gender



Explanation:
• This groups users by gender.
• Then calculates the average salary for each group.


GROUP BY with COUNT

Find how many users were referred by each user:


Output:

referred_by_idtotal_referred1221

HAVING Clause: Filtering Groups

Let’s say we only want to show genders where the average salary is greater than
?75,000.


Why not
• 
• 

?
is used before grouping.
is used after groups are formed — it’s the only way to filter

aggregated values.


Another Example: Groups with More Than 1 Referral




Summary


ClausePurposeCan use aggregates?WHEREFilters rows before groupingNo GROUP BY
Groups rows based on column values
N/AHAVINGFilters groups after aggregationYes

Use

to organize data, and

to filter those groups based on

aggregate conditions.


ROLLUP

To get subtotals and grand totals, you can use	:



Explanation:
• This will give you a count of users by gender, along with a grand total for all users.

Stored Procedures in MySQL

A stored procedure is a saved SQL block that can be executed later. It’s useful when you want to encapsulate logic that can be reused multiple times — like queries, updates, or conditional operations.


Why Change the Delimiter?

By default, MySQL uses	to end SQL statements.

But when defining stored procedures, we use	inside the procedure as well. This
can confuse MySQL. To avoid this, we temporarily change the delimiter (e.g. to
or	) while creating the procedure.


Syntax for Creating a Stored Procedure


After the procedure is created, we reset the delimiter back to	.


Creating a Procedure with Input Parameters

Let’s say you want to create a stored procedure that inserts a new user into the table.

Example:

This creates a procedure named	that accepts five input parameters.


Calling the Procedure

You can call the procedure using:

This will insert the new user into the	table.


Notes

• Input parameters are declared using the	keyword.
• Stored procedures are stored in the database and can be reused.


Viewing Stored Procedures




Dropping a Stored Procedure




Summary


CommandPurposeDELIMITER $$Temporarily change statement delimiterCREATE PROCEDUREDefines a new stored procedureCALL procedure_name(...)Executes a stored procedureDROP PROCEDURERemoves an existing procedure
Triggers in MySQL

A trigger is a special kind of stored program that is automatically executed

(triggered) when a specific event occurs in a table — such as
.

Triggers are commonly used for:
• Logging changes
• Enforcing additional business rules
• Automatically updating related data



Basic Trigger Structure






Triggers can be fired:

,

, or



• or
• On	,

an event
, or





Scenario: Log Every New User Insertion

Suppose we want to log every time a new user is inserted into the	table.
We’ll create a separate table called	to store log entries.



Step 1: Create the Log Table




Step 2: Create the Trigger

We now define a trigger that runs after a new user is added.



Explanation:
• 



means the trigger fires after the user is inserted.

• 

refers to the new row being added to the

table.

• We insert the new user’s ID and name into the	table.


Step 3: Test the Trigger


Now check the	table:

You should see Ritika’s info automatically logged.


Dropping a Trigger

If you need to remove a trigger:



Summary


Trigger ComponentDescriptionBEFORE / AFTERWhen the trigger runsINSERT / UPDATE /
DELETE
What kind of action triggers itNEW.columnRefers to the new row (for INSERT , UPDATE )OLD.columnRefers to the old row (for UPDATE , DELETE )FOR EACH ROWExecutes for each affected row
More on MySQL

This section covers some essential MySQL features and operators that help you write more powerful and flexible queries.


1. Logical Operators

Logical operators are used to combine multiple conditions in a	clause.

OperatorDescriptionExample
AND
All conditions must be true salary > 50000 AND gender = 'Male'
ORAt least one condition is true gender = 'Male' OR gender = 'Other'NOTReverses a conditionNOT gender = 'Female'

2. Add a Column to an Existing Table

Use	to add a column:



This adds a new column named

to the

table.





3. Wildcard Operators

Wildcards are used with the	operator for pattern matching in text.

WildcardDescriptionExample
%Matches any sequence
WHERE name LIKE 'A%' (starts with A)
_Matches a single character WHERE name LIKE '_a%' (second letter is ‘a’)

4. LIMIT with OFFSET



       is used to limit the number of rows returned. rows before starting to return rows.






This skips the first 10 rows and returns the next 5. Alternative syntax:





This also skips 10 and returns 5 (syntax:

skips a number of

















).





5. DISTINCT Keyword

is used to return only unique values.


Returns a list of unique gender values from the	table.


6. TRUNCATE Keyword

removes all rows from a table, but keeps the table structure.

• Faster than
• Cannot be rolled back (unless in a transaction-safe environment)


7. CHANGE vs MODIFY Column



Both

and

are used to alter existing columns in a table, but they

work slightly differently.

CHANGE: Rename and change datatype



This renames

to

and changes its type.


MODIFY: Only change datatype

This changes only the datatype of	.
